Overview
--------
Welcome to Season Spotter! We use modern technology to bring the ancient art of tracking the seasonal changes in plants, shrubs, and trees into the 21st century. We have mounted hundreds of cameras around North America (and beyond) to record the timing of leafing out, flowering, seed making, and leaf drop across many types of ecosystems. While we can use automated algorithms to identify some of the vegetation changes in the photographs, we need your eyes and brain to figure out the changes that are harder to spot. The timing of these seasonal changes tells us about how variation in weather and climate affect plant, shrub, and trees species. Ultimately, we hope to produce forecasts of the timing of these seasonal changes. These forecasts will be useful for a wide range of purposes, including in agriculture, conservation, tourism, and public health.


Why do we study seasonal change?
--------------------------------
The study of the seasonal timing of changes in plants, shrubs, and trees is called phenology. It is one of the easiest things to observe in the natural world, but it is powerful. Phenology is very sensitive to changes in weather and climate and so is a sentinel – one of the first things we see change when climate patterns change.

Phenology is also important in determining when and for how long plants, shrubs, and trees have green leaves. Through photosynthesis, these green leaves take carbon dioxide out of the air and use the energy of the sun to turn it into plant food. Carbon dioxide is an important greenhouse gas and the amount of it in the atmosphere plays an important role in long-term climate patterns. At the same time that they take in carbon dioxide, these green leaves are releasing water vapor into the air. Water vapor influences cloudiness and precipitation.

So phenology is both an indicator of changing climate patterns and plays a role in how the earth’s vegetation influences those patterns. By studying phenology, we learn more about how biology is part of the whole-earth system. 


Why do we use cameras?
----------------------
People have studied phenology for millennia. But until recently, individuals were limited to the places they could get to frequently. We have some phenology records that go back centuries, but they are typically for a very small geographic area. We use cameras so that we can understand phenology across an entire continent and across different ecosystems. North America is made up of a wide diversity of ecosystems, so what we learn about them can be extended to much of the rest of the world. The cameras also have the ability to take measurements much more frequently than a human observer could. Our cameras take multiple pictures each day, and so we can precisely pinpoint the day on which phenology events occur.


Who are we?
-----------
We are a group of scientists and educators at Harvard University and at the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). (more...)


